[MUSIC PLAYING]
His chief characteristic was
singleness of purpose.
His idea of happiness was to
fight and his idea of misery
was submission.
His favorite occupation
was bookworming.
And his favorite poets
were Shakespeare,
Aeschylus and Goethe.
His favorite heroes were the
rebel slave leader, Spartacus,
and the astronomer Kepler.
His favorite names were Laura
and Jenny and his favorite
dish was fish.
His favorite motto was, you
must have doubts about
everything.
And his favorite
color was red.
Karl Marx died 100 years ago,
yet his specter continues to
haunt our world.
Though his body is safely buried
in Highgate Cemetery,
his ideas refuse to lie down
and die quietly beside him.
Those ideas have shaped our
world more profoundly than
Darwin, Freud, or Einstein.
They've inspired men and women
to fight and die for them, to
overthrow old nations and
construct new ones.
And yet in Britain, where he
spent the most productive
years of his life, people know
relatively little about him,
apart from that grim, imposing
monument in Highgate Cemetery
with its gigantic beard, which
has come to be a sort of
symbol for what people think
of as Marx or Marxism.
For 14 years, I've been
coming here now.
And my main objective is to
endeavor to keep this grave as
tidy and as clean as possible.
No matter what the weather--
whether it's
rain, sunshine or snow--
there's always someone visiting
the grave of Marx.
And they come from all
parts of the world.
I feel it's a rather beautiful
monument myself.
It's like the philosophy of
Marx, I think, so strong.
Many, many English people visit
here, like other people,
but they know very
little about him.
But after leaving this cemetery,
they've had their
first lesson in Marxism after
reading the slogan there.
The philosophers have only
interpreted the world in
various ways.
The point, however,
is to change it.
That just as important today as
it was when it was written.
The words written on Marx's
monument are important today,
because his philosophy has
changed the world.
From the Soviet revolution of
1917 to the present day, one
third of the world's
population--
1 and a half thousand million
people in over 30 countries--
have come to live in societies
claiming inspiration from the
ideas of Karl Marx.
His revolutionary ideas of class
struggle have inspired a
chain of revolutions throughout
the world.
But the Marxist states that have
resulted have sometimes
been a long way from Marx's
original ideas.
Even the forbidding monument to
Marx in Highgate Cemetery
is not, in fact, where he
was originally buried.
His original grave lies 100
yards away marked by plain,
stone slab.
And the contrast between these
two graves is like the gap
between what Marx was and
what he's become.
Between Marx himself and the
long tradition called Marxism.
I have never seen a man whose
bearing was so provoking and
intolerable.
He was domineering, impetuous,
passionate, full of boundless
self-confidence, vain,
treacherous, and morose, a
powerful, shaggy,
untamed old man.
These are some of the ways that
Marx's contemporaries
described him.
Marx was a German Jew, studied
philosophy and law, married a
minor aristocrat, was forced by
his political activities to
move from Germany to France, to
Belgium, finally to settle
in Britain, where a Prussian
police spy described his life.
Marx lives in one
of the worst--
therefore one of the cheapest--
quarters of London.
In the whole apartment, there
is not one clean and solid
piece of furniture.
In private life, he is an
extremely disorderly, cynical,
human being and a bad host. He
leads a real gypsy existence--
washing, grooming, and changing
his linen are things
he does rarely.
He's often drunk.
Though he's often idle for days
on end, he will work day
and night with tireless
endurance when he has a great
deal of work to do.
Much of Marx's work was done in
the British museum, using
this vast library to research
and write a complex,
far-reaching, interconnected
series of books, pamphlets,
articles and manifestos.
They're aimed not so much at a
moral protest at the evils of
capitalism, as at a cool,
dispassionate analysis of how
capitalism actually works, how
it came about, and how it can
be changed.
For this reason, his key
theoretical work is called--
not as you might expect,
socialism--
but Capital.
It's a book that the Russian
censors pronounced so boring
that they let it through.
But it's no museum piece, hidden
within its sometimes
forbidding prose is the
promise of revolution.
It was a starting point for
a chain of ideas that have
inspired a world movement.
"Workers of all lands, unite.
You have nothing to lose but
your chains," Marx wrote in
the Communist Manifesto.
These are the industrial working
class to whom Marx
addressed himself.
His writing was aimed at
their emancipation.
It was rooted in the material
reality of their lives.
Marx began by examining
human labor.
The exercise of labor power--
labor, is the workers
own life activity.
And this life activity he sells
to another person, in
order to secure the necessary
means of subsistence.
He works in order to live.
For Marx, the capitalist hired
the worker's labor power in
order to extract a
surplus from it.
And there was a built in
conflict between the workers
and the capitalists
who exploited
them, a class struggle.
Nothing new, he wrote, because
one fact is common to all past
ages, the exploitation of
one class by another.
The key thing about any society
was who provided labor
power, who owned the means of
production, and how this
relationship was organized.
In capitalism, for instance,
the workers don't own the
factories, the means of
production, so they must sell
their labor as a commodity to
those who do, who extract a
surplus from their labor.
In the same way in feudal
society, the serfs were tied
to the land and obliged to hand
over a part of what they
produced to the lord
of the manor.
And in slave society, the
slaves themselves were
physically owned by their
masters, who also owned what
they produced with
their labor.
For Marx, the difference
between capitalism and
previous systems was
its phenomenal
productiveness and dynamism.
Marx believed that the pumping
out of surplus from the
workers' labor power gave
capitalism its revolutionary
force, allowing it to reinvest
the surplus and expand,
harnessing the new technologies
of the industrial
age, shattering older ways of
organizing society, drawing
men, women, and children from
off the land into the new
forms of factory production.
Capitalism adapted workers to
the disciplines of factory
labor, fixing them
in their place.
In Marx's words, it transformed
the living worker
into a mere living accessory
of the machine.
In so doing, capitalism had
produced a new kind of human
being, the industrial worker,
the proletariat.
For Marx, workers were alienated
or separated from
both the products of their labor
and from the surplus
expropriated by the capitalist.
Their working
lives were fragmented by
the division of labor.
They were split off from other
workers through competition.
They'd lost a sense of being
at home in the world they
themselves had created.
Instead their lives were
overshadowed by the alien
force of capital, feeding
off their living labor.
Marx wrote, "Capital is dead
labor that, vampire-like,
lives only by sucking living
labor, and lives the more, the
more labor it sucks." And yet,
he believed capitalism was to
be its own grave-digger.
Behind the dynamism and
productiveness of capitalism,
Marx saw the appalling
conditions it offered to
working men and women, living
cramped in overcrowded
tenements with open sewers,
crippled by hunger, illness,
and debt and by the constant
fear of unemployment, slumps,
and crises of capitalism.
Marx believed that the
experience of capitalism would
begin to unify the proletarian
as a class.
He wrote, "With the development
of industry, the
proletariat not only increases
in number, it becomes
concentrated in greater
masses.
Its strength grows and it feels
that strength more."
Marx believed that the workers
would increasingly abandon
attempts at compromise
and reform.
They would challenge the
capitalist system through
trade unions and political
parties.
These industrial and political
struggles would produce a
class-conscious labor movement
that would finally overthrow
capitalism.
Marx rooted his analysis in the
realities of 19th century
industry, partly learned from
his friend Engels--
a mill-owner in Manchester,
then the hub of world
production.
Marx made no claim that
his analysis would be
good for all time.
So what relevance does it
have 100 years later?
What stands on the site of
Engels' original factory?
What kind of capitalism
remains?
Well for a start, not much,
because recession has struck
here as elsewhere.
Capitalism seems to have
disappeared, though not quite
in the way Marx imagined.
But in one corner
of the factory,
it's a different story.
A thriving young business
manufactures high tech
microchip control systems for
the leisure industry.
Its managing director
is 22 years old.
I don't know really how
Marx would see us now.
I suppose by the definition
of capitalism, yes I'm a
capitalist. I'd like to think
that I'm not the same sort of
capitalist that used to be
here in the time of Marx.
I think capitalism still exists,
obviously it's got to
if people are going to work,
producing things, making
profits, and creating jobs.
However, I think they overall
face of it has
changed an awful lot.
Nowadays, there's much more
cooperation between myself and
the people working here.
The products that we're
manufacturing the most of, at
the moment, is the
Snooker light.
It goes into a Snooker
club and monitors the
actual table usage.
We've installed them
in Snooker clubs
all over the country.
It's an irony that Marx
might have cherished,
that down in London--
where Mike Newton's electronic
control systems monitor the
Snooker tables--
one young, unemployed player
sees the system through
different eyes.
When you first become
unemployed, you start off and
you think to yourself, it'll
only take two or three weeks
until I find a position and
I should be all right.
Then a week amounts.
And it just really is
soul-destroying.
I get GBP 22 a week.
I'd like to see Maggie Thatcher
live off of GBP 22 a
week, I really would.
You just get deeper and
deeper in debt.
There's no way in the
world that you can
live on GBP 22 a week.
You can't eat properly.
You only eat once a
day, and even then
only very cheap foods.
When you get bills come in, you
have to phone the people
up or go to see the people, like
cap-in-hand all the time.
It's almost what it
was 100 years ago.
We're going backwards
instead of forwards.
We're going backwards.
Same old thing, the rich man in
his castle and the poor man
at his gates.
The system--
capitalism system-- doesn't
give us anything really.
They're just-- all they're
interested in is just making
as much money as possible,
and fuck the
rights of the workers.
They haven't got any rights as
far as they're concerned.
If a boss is generous enough to
offer you a job, that's it
as far as he's concerned.
Then he's God.
And you must look up to him and
do everything you possibly
can to keep it.
Because he knows full well
that if you don't tow the
line, he'll just sling you out
and get somebody else.
And you're always conscious
of that fact.
A century after Marx's death,
the image of workers as the
raw material for the industrial
sausage machine may
seem to many people
a bit far-fetched.
Marx would have been the first
to see that in the journey
from the 19th century to the
present day, capitalism has
changed profoundly.
Some have even claimed that
class divisions and,
therefore, class struggle have
ceased to exist. Of course,
today's working class looks a
great deal of different from
the 19th century sepia prints as
it hurries to the office or
the factory of modern
capitalism.
It's no longer the top hat and
the cloth cap that describes
capitalism, nor even its
modern equivalent--
the bowler hat and
the hard hat.
Today's proletariat works in
a range of industries that
didn't exist a century ago.
It includes more women workers,
more black workers,
more workers in the office and
service sectors, more public
employees, fewer in
manufacturing.
The modern working class
is divided in all
these different ways.
And yet, it still sells
its labor for wages.
And it's labor still produces
profits, at
least that's the intention.
And people still experience--
even with three million
unemployed--
the feeling that work
is not the center of
their creative lives.
It's just a job really.
You do your job, but I wouldn't
say it was interest.
You don't choose
it as a career.
It's just something
that you take out.
Obviously I make the money, so
that's an important part.
You need money anywhere,
then you go to work.
You've got to come to work and
earn some money to do what you
want to do at home and enjoy
yourself, haven't you?
Many people will recognize the
sense of release at the end of
the working day.
Marx had written, the worker
only feels at home outside his
work, and in his work
he feels a stranger.
He is at home when he's not
working, and when he works his
is not at home.
Marx also pointed to the way
workers become split off from
the products of their labor,
which stare back at them from
the shelves of shops, stores,
and supermarkets as if they
were alien objects.
He wrote, "There is a definite
social relation between men
that assumes in their eyes the
fantastic form of a relation
between things.
This I call the fetishism, which
attaches itself to the
products of labor, so soon
as they are produced as
commodities." Marx anticipated
the consumer society.
In the language of consumption,
objects take on a
kind of magical significance
of their own.
We are the products of a new
consciousness industry, buying
not just goods but identities.
Money becomes the universal
language of human relations.
Fundamentally, the capitalism
that Marx wrote about a
century ago remains intact.
Capital still commands the
forces of production.
It harnesses and hires
labor power.
It secures the raw materials
for production.
It develops and implements
new technologies.
It reaches out to ever-expanding
world markets,
maximizing profits, knocking out
competitors, centralizing
on a world scale.
The capitalism we face today
links London, New York, Tokyo,
into a concentrated, integrated
world system.
[MUSIC: "WALL STREET
SHUFFLE" BY 10CC]
Today, we live in a world of
international banks, where
finance capital coordinates
the running of the
international economy.
The banks are interlinked with
international corporations
that employ an international
workforce.
They operate through
international trade and
transportation.
They communicate through
international data systems.
Marx wrote, "The bourgeoisie has
subjected the country to
the rule of the towns." From the
corporate headquarters in
the great cities, they direct
the modern world.
They invest internationally--
splitting up work between
factories in different
countries, linking the world
through what Marx called, a new
and international division
of labor, drawing in a new Third
World workforce at low
wages to yield higher profits,
the most exploited sector of
modern industrial capitalism.
This Third World workforce--
fresh to the discipline
of the factory--
operates 20th century technology
in return for wages
and conditions which hark back
to the 19th century.
The working condition here is
very bad because we work 16
hours a day.
They are forcing us to have
overtime all the day.
We have six to six, some
times six to eight.
Yeah, it's really sad,
because they give
us compulsory overtime.
Sometimes they are collapse--
but nobody can go out because
the door is locked, padlocked.
And the window is closed.
Nobody can go home
to their place.
For Third World workers, life
under capitalism seems similar
to the conditions described by
Marx's collaborator, Engels,
when he wrote, "A horde of
ragged women and children
swarm about here, as filthy as
the swine that thrive upon the
garbage heaps and in the
puddles." It's the usual
catalogue of poverty--
hunger, disease, poor
sanitation, high infant mortality.
A century after Marx's death,
capitalism has certainly
changed and yet not changed.
It's still a system which Marx
would recognize, and in which
we recognize him.
But Marx also thought of
capitalism as its own
gravedigger.
How did that idea stand
the test of time?
For Marx, capitalism bore
within it the seeds of
revolution.
He expected this to begin in
Europe, where capitalism was
most advanced, and to become
a world process as it
progressed.
The nearest he came to this in
his own lifetime was with the
uprising of the French workers
against the state in 1871 and
the formation of what
has come to be known
as The Paris Commune.
The Commune began when French
workers took the opportunity
of a war between France and
Germany to undertake the first
proletarian revolution.
Marx, who was commonly seen as
an enemy of democracy, admired
the Commune because it tried
to set up a decentralized
federal system of direct
democracy, whereas Engels put
it, all officials--
high or low--
were paid only the wages
received by other workers.
And they were subject
to election and
recall at short notice.
The Communards had toppled the
existing state machinery,
which they saw as organizing
society to serve the interests
of capitalism.
In place of the dictatorship
of the bourgeoisie, they
installed what Marx and others
called, the dictatorship of
the proletariat.
For the Communards, this
dictatorship meant genuine
popular power.
They attempted to defend the
common ownership and control
of the productive forces, to
build a society where-- in
Marx's words--
"The free development of each is
the condition for the free
development of all." It was an
experiment that couldn't be
allowed to succeed.
The French and Prussian
rulers joined forces
to destroy the Commune.
The forces of order besieged
Paris to stamp out this
short-lived experiment.
Over 20,000 Communards
were killed.
During the half century between
the Paris Commune and
the end of the first World War,
Marxist ideas became a
powerful force throughout
Europe.
And just as the chaos of the
Franco-Prussian war had helped
to bring about the Paris
Commune, so the colossal
slaughter and incompetence of
the first World War helped to
produce the right conditions for
the overthrow of the Czar
Nicholas II.
The Bolsheviks seized power
in the first successful
revolution claiming inspiration
from Marx's ideas.
Under conditions of severe
czarist repression, the
Bolsheviks had forged a
tightly disciplined,
centralized, secretive
revolutionary party which
spread Marx's ideas throughout
the Russian Workers' Movement.
Their leader was Lenin, and like
Marx himself, he argued
that a Russian Revolution would
only survive if it was
part of an international
revolution.
He claimed, "We are now in a
besieged fortress, waiting for
the other detachments of the
world socialist revolution to
come to our relief."
The conventional wisdom has it
that this world revolution
never materialized, and
therefore Marx was wrong.
But in fact, during the years
following World War I, Marx's
predictions came within a hair's
breath of succeeding.
Even Britain--
the center of European
stability--
was closer to revolution than
at any time in this century.
There were tanks on the streets
of London, troops
encircling Glasgow where
the red flag
flew on the town hall.
There were little Moscows in
the [? ronda ?], strikes on
the railways and in the mines,
dockers refusing to load arms
for the war against Soviet
Russia, coupled with the
threat of a general strike.
In northern Italy--
in Milan and Turin--
the scenario was much as
Marx had predicted.
The international proletarians
occupied the factories and
took control of production by
setting up workers' councils.
"The Factory Council is the
model for the proletarian
state," claimed their
leader Gramsci.
They armed themselves to
defend their gains.
It was a challenge that was only
contained by the army and
by Mussolini's Blackshirts.
"Berlin Under the Red
Flag," announced the
headlines in 1919.
In the unrest following World
War I, the Kaiser was deposed
and a republic formed under
the powerful German Social
Democrat Party, who
were strongly
influenced by Marxism.
In January 1919, the
Spartacist League--
forerunner of the German
Communist Party--
led uprisings throughout
Germany, which came close to
the revolution Marx
had expected.
Many soldiers and workers had
been disillusioned and
radicalized by the war.
And in Bremen, Leipzig, Bavaria,
and Hamburg, Soviet
republics were set up.
Spartacists leader, Karl
Liebknecht, announced "Whether
or not we shall survive
when all is achieved,
our program we live.
It will dominate the world of
liberated peoples in spite of
all." Because the German army
was unreliable, this
revolutionary crisis was only
put down by a volunteer
right-wing militia, the Free
Corps, forerunner of Hitler's
brownshirts.
The Free Corps broke the back
of the German Workers'
Movement at the cost of
thousands of lives.
The leaders--
among them Rosa Luxemburg--
were murdered and dumped
in the canals.
In Hungary, the pattern
was the same--
the monarchy overthrown by
a broad based socialist
government.
Then the declaration of
a Soviet Republic.
Its leader, Bela Kun said,
quoting Marx, "Every step of
actual movement is more
important than a dozen
programs." The Hungarian Soviet
lasted six months and
was undermined by the invasion
of Czech and Romanian forces
who occupied Budapest. Workers'
Councils like this
one were executed.
Marx's predictions of
proletarian revolution in the
advanced capitalist countries
had been proved right.
The proletariat looked-- for
a time-- as though it would
become the leading class
of the 20th century.
Where the Marxist movements went
wrong was in misjudging
the resilience of capitalism and
the strength of the state.
It was a costly mistake.
And as the tide of revolution
in Europe began to ebb, it
left the Russian revolution
isolated and exposed.
The Soviet Union
stood isolated.
It was encircled by Czarist
troops backed by the armies of
17 nations.
These were the soldiers,
workers, and peasants who
fought to hold back the
combined forces of the
capitalist countries in their
crusade against what the
British War Secretary, Winston
Churchill, called "The
nameless beast of communism."
For a time, it seemed likely
that the first Marxist
revolution would be defeated,
like the other
revolutions in Europe.
But in an amazingly short space
of time, the Bolsheviks
shaped a Red Army from an
undisciplined, backward, peasantry.
Its organizer was the War
Commissar, Trotsky.
This army took on a vastly
superior force and, against
all expectations, they won.
The Soviet Revolution survived
but at appalling cost.
Russia's backward and
underdeveloped industry lay in
ruins, devastated by the war.
Nine million people had died in
the war from famine, cold
and disease.
Now to the immense problems
of this vast semi-feudal,
backward nation were
added the burden
of millions of refugees.
There was also sabotage by
opponents of the Bolsheviks
and even armed rebellion from
among their supporters.
Lenin faced these colossal
problems by establishing--
in his own words--
"Strict, iron discipline backed
up by the state power
of the armed workers." And
Lenin's centralized Bolshevik
party structure became the
instrument of this discipline.
He had set in motion the
state machine that
Stalin would inherit.
Opposition was banned and the
secret police began the
searches, arrests
and executions.
Rosa Luxemburg had written, "The
remedy which Trotsky and
Lenin have found-- the
elimination of
democracy as such--
is worse than the disease it
is supposed to cure, for it
stops up the very living source
from which alone can
come the correction of all the
innate shortcomings of social
institutions.
That source is the active,
untrammeled, energetic
political life of the broadest
masses of the people." Her
words were tragically borne
out in the trials and
executions of Mensheviks and
social revolutionaries.
Lenin's Party of Iron became
increasingly centralized,
bureaucratic and dictatorial.
Worst of all, Red Terror failed
to solve Russia's
economic problems. Lenin was
forced to relax the rigors of
war communism and adopt a new
economic policy of limited
private enterprise.
The new policy worked.
The peasants provided food for
the cities and industrial
production began again.
The new socialist society began
to tackle the aftermath
of the war, to feed and clothe
the millions of orphans, to
provide free education and to
raise the cultural level of
the Russian population, to
produce a new generation of
human beings--
tough, clean, disciplined,
hardworking, to break the hold
of religious superstition,
and to construct a modern
industrial society.
In spite of everything,
the Soviet
Revolution did move forward.
In spite of everything, there
was a sense of optimism, of
the novelty and boldness of
the Soviet experiment.
There was a sense of modernism,
of new openings
towards the future.
People were becoming aware of
themselves as agents in a
process of revolutionary
change.
Lenin died in 1924.
There was genuine
popular grief.
Almost at once, the construction
of the Lenin myth
began, part of which is that
Lenin had no responsibility
for the excesses that
were to follow.
Stalin was waiting
in the wings.
Already General Secretary under
Lenin, Stalin was an
ambitious careerist who
had made his way
up the party hierarchy.
He took control of the funeral
arrangements and mummified
Lenin like a pharaoh.
Lenin had built the Soviet party
machine that Stalin was
to control.
Towards the end of his life,
he had sensed the possible
consequences.
But Lenin's warnings
were ignored.
Throughout the '20s
and '30s, Stalin
consolidated his control.
He began to build his own frozen
version of socialism, a
society of neat lives and
optimistic souls with no room
for questioning or debate.
Stalin was determined to drag
Russia out of backwardness.
"Either we do it or they
crush us," he claimed.
He set about mechanizing and
collectivising the mass of peasants.
His aim was to use agriculture
to supply the surplus for
rapid industrialization.
And to achieve this, Stalin
decided to eliminate the
wealthier peasants as a class.
About five million people were
deported and two million died.
For Stalin, this was
only a beginning.
He jailed or executed millions
of people in the party, the
army and the bureaucracy.
This was Stalin's contribution
to the fulfillment of the
Communist Manifesto.
Stalin had done more to destroy
the hope of socialism
than all its enemies
put together.
And yet, at the price of terror,
Stalin modernized the
Soviet economy.
And under Stalin, Marxism
became the religion of
Russia's national development.
The foundations of modern
industry were laid.
He announced, "We are becoming
a country of metal, a country
of automobiles, a country of
tractors." And following
Lenin, he claimed, "The party,
plus electrification equals
communism."
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
The central planning of the
Soviet economy spawned a
massive bureaucracy.
6 million even under Lenin,
now it had become a
self-perpetuating elite.
The bureaucracy was charged
with producing the epic
monuments to Stalin's era.
At a time during the 1930s when
the capitalist world was
gripped by recession and the
growth of Fascism, the images
of Soviet modernization,
education, and welfare
appealed to many in the west as
an attractive alternative.
With his rich sense of humor,
Stalin claimed, "Of all the
treasures a state can possess,
the human lives of its
citizens are for us the
most precious."
Soviet citizens were required
to express their unanimous
consent for Stalin's rule
through the ballot box.
In the one-party state, who
can guess which party
Stalin voted for?
Hello.
This is Moscow calling--
It was this deformed model of
Marxism that was exported to
communist parties around
the world.
Workers of the world unite.
[SINGING IN RUSSIAN]
In 1939, Stalinism--
the deformity of socialism,
confronted Fascism--
the deformity of capitalism.
As in the first World War,
Russia faced Germany.
But this time, Stalin's newly
industrialized Soviet Union
was finally victorious.
The war cost 20 million Russian
lives and confirmed
Stalin as a world
figure alongside
Roosevelt and Churchill.
The nameless beast of communism
carved up post-war
Europe with the man who had
organized the war of
intervention.
The Soviet Union was
now a world power.
As the Soviet Union began to
rebuild its industrial base
shattered by the war, Stalinism
congealed into a new
system of exploitation.
Like capitalism, there were
the old divisions between
manual and mental labor.
Like capitalism, workers still
labored for wages and
incentives.
And like capitalism,
a surplus was
extracted from their labor.
But the property-owning
capitalist class had been
replaced by a privileged
administrative class who
controlled and disposed of the
surplus because they were
effectively in command
of the state.
The cement that held this
system in place was a
sentimental rewriting of the
origins of the so-called
worker's state in the heroism
of the October Revolution.
Its bland optimism and moral
piety would almost certainly
have been despised by
both Marx and Lenin.
This mythology was used to
legitimize Stalin's caricature
of socialism and to affirm him
in command, the benign father
of his people.
In the aftermath of the war,
it was this version of
socialism that was imposed on
eastern Europe by conquest. It
was sealed behind defensive
ramparts, fortress socialism
confronting fortress
capitalism.
Each system feeding off the
other and providing
justification for a mutual
military buildup.
[DOG BARKING]
Can you make out any
rank in the tower?
I think the one on the right
is a Lance Corporal and the
one on the left is either
a [UNINTELLIGIBLE]
Sergeant or a Sergeant.
Socialism came to
eastern Europe
not as Marx had foreseen--
by popular uprising--
but by military force.
This was Stalin's version
of internationalism.
And this force was as much
to hold people down under
socialism as to raise them up.
It was a force that brought
the Baltic states into the
Soviet Union and brought
communism to Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, East Germany.
Only Yugoslavia escaped to build
its own radical brand of
decentralized socialism.
But despite the reassurance of
the Red Army, these regimes
have never been wholly secure.
In Czechoslovakia, 40% of the
population had voted for
communism in the post-war
elections.
But in May 1968--
after two decades
of Stalinism--
the Communist Party itself,
under Dubcek, tried to create
socialism out of Stalinism.
It is a true, real, new
spring in our country.
Everyone feels it and
everyone wishes it.
We want to see a truly
democratic socialism.
We don't want to restore
capitalism.
private ownership.
That's clear.
We just want to continue in
socializing the whole society
and narrowing the gap between
the theories about socialism
and the practice in
Czechoslovakia.
The Communist Party abandoned
its control of information
through censorship.
The free flow of information
must have come as a profound
shock after two decades
of silence.
It opened eyes and opened
mouths, stimulating criticism
and debate.
The truth about the system could
finally be acknowledged.
The leadership even relaxed
its monopoly of power
claiming, the party cannot
impose its authority.
This has to be won, again and
again, by party activity.
But for the Soviet Union-- as
Marx would have put it-- the
force of argument
was countered by
the argument of force.
Warsaw Pact tanks invaded
Czechoslovakia to be met with
popular defiance.
The same tanks had crushed the
East German generals' strike
of 1953 and the worker's
councils of the Hungarian
uprising of 1956.
Soviet soldiers--
who had been told that
they had come to save
Czechoslovakia from CIA-backed
counter revolution--
were faced with the nonviolent
protests of the mass of the
Czech people.
The Soviet tank crews were
besieged, not by capitalist
stooges, but by Czech socialists
arguing their
position and demanding
Russia's departure.
On the walls of Prague appeared
a single word in
Russian, why?
The day after the invasion--
under the noses of
the Russians--
1,200 Czech communists met
secretly in a factory to
oppose the Soviet invasion.
Delegate after delegate--
many of whom had been party
officials under the Stalinist
regime of Novotny--
denounced the Russians and
called for their withdrawal.
Communist Party is strongly
against occupation.
It means against Russians.
I think it's only one who
organized everything against
occupants, I think it's
Communist Party's Czech
Communist Party.
Maybe you are surprised about
this fact, but it's reality.
It took 18 months before
control was finally
reestablished.
Dubcek's supporters were
jailed or demoted.
The reform was dismantled.
For the masses, Western-style
consumerism was offered to
pacify opposition.
But in Czechoslovakia as in
Poland, a cumbersome,
top-heavy political system found
this hard to deliver.
In Poland, the monument
proudly proclaims--
Leninism, the triumphant
banner of our epoch.
The Leninist version of Marxism
received a rude shock
when, in 1980, a genuine trade
union movement emerged from a
series of bitter strikes
throughout Poland.
It's common to recognize in
solidarity, the Catholic and
nationalist opposition
to Polish communism.
But solidarity was a profound
threat above all, because it
gained the support of 3/4 of the
Polish working class, even
in the communist power base of
the Silesian coal fields.
[SPEAKING POLISH]
It was the renewal of class
struggle between the workers
and their so-called workers'
state which made solidarity
such a powerful challenge.
They proposed basic changes,
echoing the Paris Commune for
genuine work-based democracy.
They backed up their demands
with the organized industrial
power of the strike.
[SPEAKING POLISH]
The thrust of Solidarity as
working class, popular
democracy would have been as
unwelcome in the capitalist
west as it was to the
Polish state.
[SPEAKING POLISH]
During the suppression of the
East German uprising of 1953,
the communist poet, Bertholdt
Brecht, had suggested
helpfully that if the government
had lost confidence
in the people, perhaps it should
dissolve the people and
elect another one.
Today, it seems as if the Polish
state would like to
bury Solidarity and
elect another more
compliant working class.
In the catalog of repression
in Poland, Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany,
and so on, many would see the
stifling of hope.
But alongside the very real
repression, Marxists would
point out that every uprising in
eastern Europe also brings
nearer the socialist challenge
to Soviet style communism,
because the forces of class
struggle that produce them
refuse to disappear.
"The old mole of revolution,"
as Marx put it, "Is still at
work." Or to put it
another way--
though the Marxists and the
Kremlin may have finished with
Marx, Marx is not finished
with them.